Add practical search performance guide (#1949)
vespa-engine/documentation: en/performance/practical-search-performance-guide.md

[match:text](../reference/schema-reference.html#match). 

- `attribute` does not integarte with lingustic processing and is matched using 
[match:word](../reference/schema-reference.html#match). 

With `index` Vespa builds inverted index data structures which roughly consists of:

- A dictionary of the unique text tokens (after linguistic processing)
- Posting lists for each unique text token in the collection 

With `attribute` Vespa per default does not build any inverted index like data structures for 
potential faster query evaluation. See [Wikipedia:Inverted Index](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverted_index) 
and [Vespa internals](../proton.html#index). The reason for this is that Vespa `attribute` fields can be used
for many different things: [ranking](../ranking.html), [result grouping](../grouping.html),
 [result sorting](../reference/sorting.html), and finally searching/matching. 

Now let us focus on the `tags` field which we defined with `attribute`, matching
in this fields will be performed using `match:word`. 

<pre>
 field tags type weightedset&lt;string&gt; {
      indexing: summary | attribute
 }

>  </pre>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
</pre>
```

<pre data-test="exec">
$ vespa deploy --wait 300 app
</pre>
</div>

The above will print 

<pre>
vespa deploy --wait 300 app/ 
Uploading application package ... done

Success: Deployed app/
WARNING Change(s) between active and new application that require restart:
In cluster 'tracks' of type 'search':
    Restart services of type 'searchnode' because:
        1) Document type 'track': Field 'tags' changed: add attribute 'fast-search'

Waiting up to 300 seconds for query service to become available ...
</pre>   

To enable `fast-search` Vespa content node(s) needs to be restarted to re-build the index. 
This example uses [vespa-sentinel-cmd command tool](../reference/vespa-cmdline-tools.html#vespa-sentinel-cmd):

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec">
$ docker exec vespa bash -c "/opt/vespa/bin/vespa-sentinel-cmd restart searchnode"
</pre>
</div>

Wait for the searchnode to start up using the [health state api](../reference/metrics.html):

<pre>
curl -s http://localhost:19110/state/v1/health
</pre>

> We want to status code to flip to up before querying again:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want the status code to flip to up before querying again:
```

increased memory usage and slightly reduced indexing throughput. See also
[when to use fast-search for attributes](feature-tuning.html#when-to-use-fast-search-for-attribute-fields).

Finally, for those interested in using `match:text` for searching multi-valued field types 
like [weightedset](../reference/schema-reference.html#type:weightedset), see
[searching multi-value fields](../searching-multi-valued-fields.html).

## Multi-valued query operators

In this section we look at [multi-value query operators](../multivalue-query-operators.html) 
and their query performance characteristics. 
Many real-world use cases needs search using structured queries with many values. 

Let us assume that we have a process which have built a user profile where we have identified tags which
the user has shown previous interest for. 
For example *hard rock*, *rock*, *metal* and *finnish metal*. How can we retrieve and rank 
results using that information? One way is to search and rank using
the dotproduct between the sparse user profile representation and the track tags representation.

We can start with the [dotProduct()](../reference/query-language-reference.html#dotproduct) query operator.

> To gain control of [ranking](../ranking.html) we need to add a `rank-profile` to our schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure [ranking](../ranking.html), add a `rank-profile` to the schema:
```

<pre data-test="file" data-path="app/schemas/track.sd">
schema track {

  document track {

    field track_id type string {
      indexing: summary | attribute
      rank: filter
      match: word
    }
    field title type string {
      indexing: summary | index
      index: enable-bm25
    }
    field artist type string {
      indexing: summary | index
    }
    field tags type weightedset&lt;string&gt; {
      indexing: summary | attribute
      attribute: fast-search
    }
    field similar type tensor&lt;float&gt;(trackid{}) {
      indexing: summary | attribute
    }
  }

  fieldset default {
    fields: title, artist
  }

  document-summary track_id {
    summary track_id type string { 
      source: track_id
    }
  }
  rank-profile personalized {
    first-phase {
      expression: rawScore(tags)
    }
  }
}
</pre>

The `dotProduct`and `wand` query operators produces a rank feature called `rawScore(name)`, 
we use this as our first-phase rank expression. 

> 

Reviewer: See [rawScore(field)](../reference/rank-features.html#rawScore(field)) for details.

the matching:
<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec" data-test-assert-contains="Bonnie Tyler">
{% raw %}
$ vespa query 'yql=select title, artist, track_id from track where true' \
 'ranking.features.query(user_liked)={{trackid:TRUAXHV128F42694E8}:1.0,{trackid:TRQIQMT128E0791D9C}:1.0,{trackid:TRGVORX128F4291DF1}:1.0}' \
 'ranking=similar' \
 'hits=5'
 {% endraw %}
</pre>
</div>

However, as we can see, we retrieved some of the previous *liked* tracks as well. Let us eliminate these
from the result using the `not` query operator (`!`) in the Vespa YQL query language:

<pre>
where !weightedSet(track_id, @userLiked) 
</pre>

The [weightedSet query operator](../reference/query-language-reference.html#weightedset) is a handy query operator
when we don't need any rank feature calculated, it can also be used for large scale filters, either
positive filters (match if any of the keys matches) or negative filter (remove if any of the keys matches).
See more examples in [feature-tuning set filtering](feature-tuning.html#multi-lookup-set-filtering).

> Run query with the not filter:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run query with the `not` filter:
```

                }
            },
            {
                "id": "index:tracks/0/074b6b937d0ff7b59710c279",
                "relevance": 1.0,
                "source": "tracks",
                "fields": {
                    "track_id": "TRFQRYC12903CD0BB9",
                    "title": "Kyrie",
                    "artist": "Mr. Mister"
                }
            },
            {
                "id": "index:tracks/0/f13697952a0d5eaeb2c43ffc",
                "relevance": 0.7835690081119537,
                "source": "tracks",
                "fields": {
                    "track_id": "TRKLIXH128F42766B6",
                    "title": "Total Eclipse Of The Heart",
                    "artist": "Bonnie Tyler"
                }
            },
            {
                "id": "index:tracks/0/1c3ab39c8ffa4fd2ba388b4e",
                "relevance": 0.7503079921007156,
                "source": "tracks",
                "fields": {
                    "track_id": "TRAFGCY128F92E5F6C",
                    "title": "Hold The Line",
                    "artist": "Toto"
                }
            }
        ]
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}
</pre>

> Now we can notice that with the `not` filter, we retrieved 9,5663 documents

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can notice that with the `not` filter, we retrieved 95,663 documents
```

Let us re-run our query example :

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec" data-test-assert-contains="Bonnie Tyler">
{% raw %}
$ vespa query 'yql=select title,artist, track_id from track where !weightedSet(track_id,@userLiked)' \
'ranking.features.query(user_liked)={{trackid:TRQIQMT128E0791D9C}:1.0,{trackid:TRWJIPT128E0791D99}:1.0,{trackid:TRGVORX128F4291DF1}:1.0}' \
'ranking=similar' \
'hits=5' \
'userLiked={TRQIQMT128E0791D9C:1,TRWJIPT128E0791D99:1,TRGVORX128F4291DF1:1}'
{% endraw %}
</pre>
</div>

The `querytime` dropped down to 40 ms instead of 120 ms without the `fast-search` option. 
See also [performance considerations](../tensor-user-guide.html#performance-considerations)
when using tensor expressions and especially the tensor cell precision used.
Vespa supports both `int8`, `bfloat16`, `float` and
`double` precision cell types.  

## Multi-threaded search and ranking 
So far in this guide all our searches and ranking computations have been performed using 
single threaded matching and ranking. To enable multi-threaded execution we 
need to change our `services.xml`. 

> Multi-threaded search and ranking can improve query latency significantly and make
> use of multi-cpu core architectures better. Search and ranking has evolved since 1998 and by 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi-threaded search and ranking can improve query latency significantly and make better
use of multi-cpu core architectures. Search and ranking has evolved since 1998 and by 
```

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec">
$ docker exec vespa bash -c "/opt/vespa/bin/vespa-sentinel-cmd restart searchnode"
</pre>
</div>

Wait for the searchnode to start up 
<pre>
curl -s localhost:19110/state/v1/health
</pre>

<pre style="display:none" data-test="exec">
$ sleep 60
</pre>

Then we can repeat our tensor ranking query again:

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec" data-test-assert-contains="Bonnie Tyler">
{% raw %}
$ vespa query 'yql=select title,artist, track_id from track where !weightedSet(track_id,@userLiked)' \
'ranking.features.query(user_liked)={{trackid:TRQIQMT128E0791D9C}:1.0,{trackid:TRWJIPT128E0791D99}:1.0,{trackid:TRGVORX128F4291DF1}:1.0}' \
'ranking=similar' \
'hits=5' \
'userLiked={TRQIQMT128E0791D9C:1,TRWJIPT128E0791D99:1,TRGVORX128F4291DF1:1}'
{% endraw %}
</pre>
</div>

Now, the content node(s) will parallelize the matching and ranking 
using multiple search threads and `querytime` drops to about 15 ms. 

> The setting in services.xml sets to the global *persearch* value, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The setting in `services.xml` sets the global *persearch* value, 
```

      indexing: summary | index
    }
    field tags type weightedset&lt;string&gt; {
      indexing: summary | attribute
      attribute: fast-search
    }
    field similar type tensor&lt;float&gt;(trackid{}) {
      indexing: summary | attribute
      attribute: fast-search 
    }
    field popularity type int {
      indexing: summary | attribute
      attribute: fast-search
    }
  }

  fieldset default {
    fields: title, artist
  }

  document-summary track_id {
    summary track_id type string { 
      source: track_id
    }
  }
  rank-profile personalized {
    first-phase {
      expression: rawScore(tags)
    }
  }
  rank-profile similar {
    first-phase {
      expression: sum(attribute(similar) * query(user_liked))
    }
  }
  rank-profile similar-t2 inherits similar {
    num-threads-per-search: 2
  }
  rank-profile popularity {
    num-threads-per-search: 1
    first-phase {
      expression: attribute(popularity)
    }
  }
}
</pre>

Deploy the application again :

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec">
$ vespa deploy --wait 300 app
</pre>
</div>

> Adding a new field, does not require any restart but we need to populate the popularity field:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a new field does not require any restart, but we need to populate the popularity field:
```

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec" data-test-assert-contains='"totalCount": 0'>
$ vespa query 'yql=select track_id, popularity from track where {hitLimit:5,descending:true}range(popularity,0,Infinity) and popularity=99'
</pre>
</div>

This query fails to retrieve any documents because the range search finds 
1352 documents where popularity is 100, *and'ing* that 
top-k result with the popularity=99 filter constraint leaves us with 0 results. 

Using range search query operator with `hitLimit` can be particular handy for search use cases 
like auto-complete or [search suggestions](https://github.com/vespa-engine/sample-apps/tree/master/incremental-search/search-suggestions)
where one typically use [match: prefix](../reference/schema-reference.html#match) or
n-gram matching using [match: gram](../reference/schema-reference.html#match). 

Limiting the short few first character searches to include a `hitLimit` range on popularity 
can greatly improve the query performance and at the same time produce the general most popular suggestions. 

> As the user types more characters, the number of matches is greatly reduce, so ranking can focus on more factors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the user types more characters, the number of matches is greatly reduced, so ranking can focus on more factors
```

the `popularity` rank-profile which was configured with 1 thread per search, for low settings of `maxHits`, this
is the recommended setting:
<pre>
rank-profile popularity {
    num-threads-per-search: 1
    first-phase {
      expression: attribute(popularity)
    }
  }
</pre>

The core difference from capped range search is that `match-phase` is safe as filters works in 
the way we expect, for example searching for popularity=99. As we saw in the previous example with `range`,
it picked the k best results from the attribute and applied the filter *after*, which could cause 0 hits. 

This query does not trigger match-phase early termination because there are few hits matching the query:

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec" data-test-assert-contains='"full": true'>
$ vespa query 'yql=select track_id, popularity from track where popularity=99' \
  'ranking=popularity' \
  'ranking.matchPhase.maxHits=100' \
  'ranking.matchPhase.attribute=popularity' \
  'hits=2'
</pre>
</div>

Generally, prefer match phase early termination over capped range search with hitLimit. It's a

> a more flexible feature. Notice that `maxHits` is a per node. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a more flexible feature. Notice that `maxHits` is _per node_. 
```

the match-phase diversity is used to ensure that diverse hits are also collected **if** 
match-phase early termination kicks in.  

## Advanced query tracing 

In this section we introduce query tracing. Tracing helps understand where time (and cost) is spent, and how
to best optimize the query or schema settings. Query tracing can be enabled using the following parameters:

- [tracelevel](../reference/query-api-reference.html#tracelevel)
- [explainLevel](../reference/query-api-reference.html#explainlevel)
- [trace.timestamps](../reference/query-api-reference.html#trace.timestamps)

A simple example query with tracing enabled:

<div class="pre-parent">
  <button class="d-icon d-duplicate pre-copy-button" onclick="copyPreContent(this)"></button>
<pre data-test="exec" data-test-assert-contains="track_id">
$ vespa query 'yql=select track_id from track where tags contains "rock"' \
  'tracelevel=3' 'trace.timestamps=true' 'explainLevel=1' 'hits=1'
</pre>
</div>

The first part of the trace traces the query through the stateless container search 
chain. For each searcher invoked in the chain a timestamp relative to the start of the query 
is provided:

> <pre>

Reviewer: json hilite makes it more readable

including network serialization and deserialization. 
<pre>
{
  "timestamp": 6,
  "message": [
    {
      "start_time": "2022-03-27 15:03:20.769 UTC",
      "traces": [
        ...
      ],
      "distribution-key": 0,
      "duration_ms": 1.9814
    }
}
</pre>
Inside this message is the content node traces of the query, `timestamp_ms` is relative to the start of the query
on the content node. In this case, the content node uses 1.98 ms to evaluate the first protocol phase 
of the query (`duration_ms`). 

More explanation of the content node `traces` is coming soon. It includes information like
- How much time was spent traversing the dictionary and setting up the query.
- How much time was spent on matching and first-phase ranking.
- How much time was spent on second-phase ranking (if enabled).

These traces can help guide both feature tuning decisions and [scaling and sizing](sizing-search.html).

Later in the trace one can also see the second query protocol phase which is the summary fill:
<pre>
{
  timestamp: 7,
  message: "sc0.num0 fill to dispatch: query=[tags:rock] timeout=9997ms offset=0 hits=1 restrict=[track] summary=[null]"
}
</pre>

> And finally an overall break down of the two phases:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And finally an overall breakdown of the two phases:
```
